# Planting Date, Maturity, and Temperature Effects on Soybean Seed Yield and Composition

# Spyridon Mourtzinis, Adam P. Gaspar, Seth L. Naeve, and Shawn P. Conley

# ABSTRACT

Soybean *[Glycine max (L.) Merr.]* production has greatly increased in the upper U.S. Midwest over the last decade, but little information exists regarding the interactive effects of environment and spring management decisions on soybean seed yield and composition. Our objective was to assess the effect of four planting dates (PDs), four cultivar maturity groups (MGs), and ambient temperature between R5 to R8 (T5–T8) on soybean seed yield and composition. Field studies were established between 2014 and 2016 at three locations in Wisconsin and one in Minnesota. Across environmental conditions and management decisions, greater seed yield was positively correlated with protein and oil contents but negatively correlated with linoleic, linolenic, and sucrose contents. Multivariate data analysis showed positive synergies between early planting (late April–early May) and MG 2 for yield, oil, and oleic acid across the examined region. A MG 2 was the highest yielding and a ~1200 kg ha–1 yield difference was observed between early and late PDs. These results underline the complexity of the soybean yield-composition relationships. Additionally, the large variability in the responses of constituents to management decisions and temperature variations highlights the importance of a producer knowing the product’s end use (e.g., high yield vs. high protein) and accordingly modifying the growing environment by selecting an appropriate PD and MG for the respective region. To provide more accurate recommendations to a broader range of producers, multi-environment studies are imperative to capture large environmental variability in important soybean production areas across the United States.

# Core Ideas

- Planting date and maturity group decisions can greatly affect yield and composition.
- Temperature had a significant effect on seed yield and composition.
- Planting date × maturity group should be chosen based on the product’s end use.

While early planting is a prudent management practice to increase soybean yield, logistical, equipment, environment, and labor challenges can delay planting. However, when early planting is possible, soybean is exposed to a greater risk of a spring killing frost, early season insects and seedling diseases, and damaging rainfall events that may result in suboptimal stand. In such years, replanting may be necessary. Furthermore, the climate variability that is affecting state and regional soybean yields may also cause more frequent replanting situations. Proper replanting methods and optimal final plant stands (>247,000 plants ha–1) have been determined by Gaspar and Conley, and yet, the proper MG to use in replant or late planting scenarios are unclear. Recent research conducted in the Midsouth, where a wide range of PDs and MGs are possible, has heavily investigated the MG × PD interaction to maximize yield. However, the challenges in the northern Corn Belt include later spring PDs and killing fall.

# Published in Agron. J. 109:1–10 (2017)

S. Mourtzinis, A.P. Gaspar, and S.P. Conley, Dep. of Agronomy, Univ. of Wisconsin-Madison, 1575 Linden Drive, Madison, WI 53706; S.L. Naeve, Dep. of Agronomy and Plant Genetics, Univ. of Minnesota, 411 Borlaug Hall, 1991 Upper Buford Circle, St. Paul, MN 55108. Received 1 May 2017. Accepted 17 June 2017.

This is an open access article distributed under the CC BY license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Copyright © 2017 American Society of Agronomy

Abbreviations: MG, maturity group; PD, planting date.
frosts, which limit the growing season. Therefore, growers would benefit economically from data outlining the proper MG range to use depending on the PD, to maximize yield and avoid fall frost damage in their respective latitudinal zone.

Soybean seed contains protein and oil and depending on the end use, other important constituents such as specific amino acids (nutritionally essential and non-essential), non-protein-based amino acids, sugars, and fatty acids whose relative concentration contributes to oil stability. For example, soybean oil with higher oleic and lower linoleic and linolenic content exhibits increased oil stability (Wilson, 2004). Sugars, such as sucrose, raffinose, and stachyose, are also important since their relative concentrations contribute to flavor, taste, energy, and digestibility of feed (Liu, 1997). The value of the crop has long been based on the seeds’ relatively high protein and oil content. Currently cultivated varieties planted in Wisconsin contain approximately 30 to 40% protein and 15 to 20% oil (Roth et al., 2014). The protein and oil content of soybean has largely been controlled through breeding, and by the environmental conditions and geographical location of production. Helms and Orf (1998) showed that traditional breeding efforts could increase protein by 5 to 7%, but this effect of temperature, specifically during seed fill, has been heavily credited with altering seed composition and was found to be consistent across six varieties in a Kentucky study (Kane et al., 1997). Wolf et al. (1982) reported increased protein and oil.

# Table 1. Location description of the trials throughout Wisconsin and Minnesota during 2014, 2015, and 2016.

|Year|Location|Latitude and longitude|Soil type†‡|Clay§|OM¶|pH¶|P¶|K¶|Precip.#|GDD††|Frost‡‡|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|2014|Arlington, WI|43°18¢8² N, 89°20¢8² W|Plano SL|225|40|7|75|238|498 (–13)|1320|5 Oct.|
| |Hancock, WI|44°7¢10² N, 89°32¢7² W|Plainfield S|40|9|6.2|93|95|450 (–64)|1240|5 Oct.|
| |St. Paul, MN|44°59¢46² N, 93°10¢25² W|Waukegan SL|230|38|6.1|138|275|560 (75)|1341|30 Oct.|
| |Spooner, WI|45°49¢29² N, 91°52¢9² W|Mahtomedi LS|90|16|6.3|76|186|683 (183)|1208|4 Oct.|
|2015|Arlington, WI|43°18¢8² N, 89°20¢8² W|Plano SL|225|36|7|60|273|526 (18)|1396|16 Oct.|
| |Hancock, WI|44°7¢10² N, 89°32¢7² W|Plainfield S|40|17|6|126|51|467 (–46)|1311|14 Oct.|
| |St. Paul, MN|44°59¢46² N, 93°10¢25² W|Waukegan SL|230|40|6.8|113|301|582 (92)|1448|17 Oct.|
| |Spooner, WI|45°49¢29² N, 91°52¢9² W|Mahtomedi LS|90|14|7|68|144|551 (53)|1289|16 Oct.|
|2016|Arlington, WI|43°18¢8² N, 89°20¢8² W|Plano SL|225|34|7|53|191|543 (23)|1509|24 Oct.|
| |Hancock, WI|44°7¢10’² N, 89°32¢7’² W|Plainfield S|40|7|5.9|54|40|700 (200)|1389|13 Oct.|
| |St. Paul, MN|44°59¢46² N, 93°10¢25² W|Waukegan SL|230|38|6.1|110|259|642 (144)|1655|21 Oct.|
| |Spooner, WI|45°49¢29² N, 91°52¢9² W|Mahtomedi LS|90|12|6|68|84|465 (−62)|1346|12 Oct.|

† Soil type from web soil survey (https://www.nrcs.usda.gov). Plano: fine-silty, mixed, superactive, mesic Typic Argiudolls; Plainfield: mixed, mesic Typic Udipsamments; Waukegan: mixed, superactive, mesic Typic Hapludolls; Mahtomedi: mixed, frigid, Typic Udipsamments.

‡ LS, loamy sand; S, sand; SL, silt loam.

§ Average clay basis for this soil type.

¶ OM, organic matter. pH, P, and K values are a composite of individual sites each year.

# Precip., Cumulative precipitation across the growing season from May through September. Deviation from the 30-yr average is reported in parentheses. The Hancock and Spooner locations received supplemental irrigation as needed. Data collected from the Wisconsin State Climatology office (Madison, WI) and Minnesota State Climatology Office (St. Paul, MN).

†† Total accumulated growing degree days (GDD) base 10°C from 1 May through 1 October at each location each year.

‡‡ The date of the first fall frost at each location each year. Four-hour period under 0°C.
content, increased oleic acid, and decreased linolenic and linoleic acids as the temperature during seed fill was increased. More recently, Naeve and Huerd (2008) collected field grain samples from different growing regions within Minnesota and found that oil concentrations increased by 6.6 g kg–1 o C –1 during seed fill, but protein was not affected. The temperature during seed fill explained more variation in oil content than a specific year did.

In the northern United States, selection of both MG and PD affect the environment in which soybean progresses from R5 through R7 (seed fill). For producers in the northern Corn Belt to better compete in the world soybean market and qualify for quality premiums from soybean purchasers, a better understanding of how temperature during seed fill affects soybean seed yield and composition components, specifically the amino acids profile, has become more important over the past decade. Therefore, the objectives of this study were to (i) determine the MG × PD range that maximizes seed yield, and (ii) quantify the effects of temperature during R5 to R8 (T5–T8) on soybean seed composition characteristics in the northern Corn Belt.

# MATERIALS AND METHODS

# Field Experiment

Field trials were conducted at four agricultural research stations located at different latitudes from southern Wisconsin, central Wisconsin, and Minnesota through northern Wisconsin during 2014, 2015, and 2016 (Table 1) resulting in 12 environments (year × location). The trials were a randomized complete block design in a split-plot arrangement with four replications. The whole plot factor was five PDs targeted at 1 and 20 May, and 1, 10, and 20 June. Actual PDs in each location and year are listed in Table 2. The subplot was comprised of two varieties (within MG) within each PD. The two varieties were targeted at MGs 2.0, 1.5, 1.0, and 0.5, and were all Pioneer brand (DuPont Pioneer, Wilmington, DE) glyphosate [N-(phosphomethyl) glycine]-resistant soybean cultivars seeded at 345,800 seeds ha–1 (Table 3). Plots at Arlington and Hancock were seeded in four 76-cm rows at a length of 6.4 m, while St. Paul plots were 7.6 m long. Spooner plots were seeded in six 38-cm rows at a length of 7 m. The middle two or four (Spooner) rows of each plot were harvested at maturity with an Almaco (SPC-40, ALMACO, Nevada, IA) plot combine to determine yield. Yield was computed by adjusting moisture to 130 g kg–1.

# Seed Composition Analysis

A grain subsample was collected for each plot during harvest and analyzed for constituent determination using near-infrared (NIR) spectroscopy. Specifically, samples were analyzed for protein, oil, 18 amino acids (cysteine, lysine, methionine, threonine, tryptophan, alanine, arginine, aspartic acid, glutamic acid, glycine, histidine, proline, serine, isoleucine, leucine, phenylalanine, valine, and tyrosine), oleic, linoleic, linolenic, palmitic and stearic fatty acids, raffinose, stachyose, and sucrose contents. A Perten DA7200 Feed Analyzer was used for the NIR analysis and was fitted with equations developed by the University of Minnesota using ISIscan software (Infrasoft Intl. LLC., State College, PA) and validated by Caltest, LLC (Clifton Park, NY). Soil samples were taken at each location and analyzed for percent clay, organic matter, pH, and macronutrients at the University of Wisconsin Soil and Plant Analysis Laboratory (Marshfield, WI) (Table 1). Fertility and in-season pest control followed University Agronomy Journal.
# Table 3. Varieties planted on each planting date at the study locations.

|Variety|Maturity group|ARL, HAN, STP†|ARL, HAN, STP†|ARL, HAN, STP†|ARL, HAN, STP†|SPO‡|SPO‡|SPO‡|SPO‡|
|---|---|---|---|
|P22T69R|2.2|+|+|+|+| | | | |
|P19T01R|1.9|+|+|+|+| | | | |
|P16T04R|1.6|+|+|+|+|+| | | |
|P15T83R|1.5|+|+|+|+|+| | | |
|P10T91R|1| |+|+| |+|+| | |
|P10T02R|1| |+|+| |+|+| | |
|P06T28R|0.6| | |+|+| |+| | |
|P05T24R|0.5| | |+|+| |+| | |

† ARL, Arlington, WI; HAN, Hancock, WI; STP, St. Paul, MN.

‡ SPO, Spooner, WI.

# Statistical Analysis

Yield and compositional data were analyzed separately using PROC MIXED in SAS Version 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). Response surface methodology was used to examine the effect of PD as a day of the year, MG, and their interaction on seed yield. Both variables were treated as continuous, and their linear and quadratic forms were included in the model as fixed effects. Random effects included replication, replication × environment, replication × environment × PD, and the overall error term. The same approach was followed to examine the effect of T5 to T8 (average ambient temperatures between developmental stages R5 and R8), MG, and their interaction on yield. Planting date and air temperature variables were not used in the same model to avoid multicollinearity issues due to their correlation (r = –0.39, P < 0.0001).

Analysis of constituent variables was challenging due to their correlation with each other (Table 4). The appropriate analysis should account for their covariances, and therefore a multivariate approach, where the response variables are contained in a single variable as described by Bowley (2008), was followed. Initially, to avoid algorithm convergence issues due to the large concentration differences among variables (e.g., protein vs. single amino acid), all variables were standardized by subtracting the overall mean and dividing by the standard deviation. Then, to overcome computational issues due to the high dimensionality of the data, different models (a model for a set of response variables) were fitted. The first set of dependent variables accounted for protein and oil content. The second set accounted for the sum of protein and oil, and the sum of non-protein amino acids (taurine, hydroxyproline, lanthionine, hydroxylysine, and ornithine). The third set accounted for the sum of five essential amino acids (cysteine, lysine, methionine, threonine, and tryptophan), the sum of non-essential amino acids (alanine, arginine, aspartic, glutamic, glycine, tyrosine, proline, and serine), raffinose, and sucrose contents. The fourth set accounted for the sum of the five essential amino acids as a percentage of the 18 total, the sum of non-essential amino acids as a percentage of the 18 total, and sucrose content. Finally, the fifth set accounted for the fatty acids contents (palmitic, stearic, oleic, linoleic, and linolenic).

# RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The 12 environments included in this study provided a wide range of climate variation (Table 1). At the three sites in Wisconsin, cumulative precipitation varied compared to the 30-yr average in all the 3 yr, whereas in Minnesota, cumulative precipitation was 13 to 23% above the 30-yr average. Similar variation in temperatures was observed among sites and years. Temperatures in 2014 and 2015 were similar resulting in small differences in May to September growing degree days (GDDs) (Table 1). However, the 2016 growing season was warmer resulting in 11 to 23% greater GDD accumulation. This weather variability among the 12 growing seasons allowed us to examine the region-wide effects of management practices (PD and MG), temperature, and their interactions on soybean seed yield and composition.

Across the 12 environments in the study, soybean seed yield was positively correlated with both protein and oil contents (Table 4). The stronger correlation with oil (r = 0.40) compared to protein (r = 0.20) suggest that oil content may be a more important factor affecting seed yield. Yield was positively correlated with all examined constituents apart from linoleic and linolenic fatty acids and sucrose. Protein and oil exhibited a negative correlation (r = –0.25) as has been reported by Carrera et al. (2011). The sum of essential and non-essential amino acids was each positively correlated with protein content, r = 0.77 and r = 0.93, respectively. The sum of essential amino acids as a percentage of the 18 amino acids.
# Agronomy Journal

# Volume 109, Issue 5 • 2017

# Table 4. Pearson correlations of all response variables across years and locations.

| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |Sucrose|Stachyose|Raffinose|Linolenic|Linoleic|Oleic|Stearic|Palmitic|Non-es. AAs (% of 18)††|Es. AAs (% of 18)#|Non-P AAs¶|Non-es. AAs§|Es. AAs‡|P+O†|Oil|Protein|Yield| | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Yield| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |–0.20***|0.43***|0.18***|–0.50***|–0.22***|0.56***|0.04|0.16***|–0.02|–0.70***|0.20***|0.11***|0.49***|0.40***|0.20***|1|
|Oil|–0.28***|–0.33***| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |0.51***|–0.16***|–0.48***|0.65***|0.21***|0.54***|0.83***|0.17***|0.93***|–0.47***|0.58***|1|–0.25***|–0.25***| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|P+O†|0.40***|0.19***|–0.44***| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |–0.65***|–0.49***|–0.17***|0.28***|0.60***|0.08*|0.64***|0.35***|0.41***|0.45***|0.26***|0.18***|1| | | | | | | | | | | | |
|Protein| | | | |0.20***|0.19***| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |0.22***|0.08*|0.06|0.16***|0.26***| | |0.28***|0.10**|0.64***|0.07*|0.16***|0.16***|0.04|–0.22***|1| | | |
|Non-es. AAs (% of 18)††|–0.02|0.19***| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |0.22***|0.08*|0.06|0.16***|0.26***| | |0.28***|0.10**|0.64***|0.07*|0.16***|0.16***|0.04|–0.22***|1| | | |
|Es. AAs (% of 18)#| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |–0.70***|0.19***| | | | | | | | | | |0.22***|0.08*|0.06|0.16***|0.26***| | |0.28***|0.10**|0.64***|0.07*|0.16***|0.16***|0.04|–0.22***|1| | | |
|Non-P AAs¶|0.26***|0.49***|–0.10**| | |0.07*| | | | | | |–0.02| | | | | | |–0.15***|–0.03|0.53***|0.64***|–0.26***| | | |–0.38***| | | | | | | |–0.68***| | | | |0.29***|–0.26***|0.19***|1| | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|Non-es. AAs§| | | | | | | |0.08*| | | | | |0.93***|0.41***| | | |–0.46***| |0.89***|–0.02| | | | | | | | | | | | |–0.64***|0.88***|–0.02| | | | |–0.18***|0.08**|–0.32***|–0.05|–0.08*–0.37***|–0.22***|1| | | | | | | | | |
|Es. AAs‡| | | | |0.11***|–0.47***| | |0.77***|0.27***|0.89***| | | |–0.10**| | | | | |–0.23***|0.64***|–0.17***| | | | | |–0.24***|–0.17***| | | | | | | | |0.060.15***|–0.33***| |–0.28***|1| | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
# Fig. 1. Maturity group × planting date (as day of year) response surface of (A) yield (kg ha–1), (B) protein (g kg–1), (C) oil (g kg–1), and (D) protein+oil (g kg–1).

|A|B|
|---|---|
|4800|405|
|4600|400|
|9 4400|2 395|
|2 4000|24200|
|2.0 1 385|2 390|
|3800| |
|3600|1.6 1.8 380|
|2.0| |
|3400|130 140 150 160 170 180|
|Planting|date (day Of year)|
|0.6 0.8|Maturity - 1.0 1.2 group 375|
|Planting|130 140 150 160 170 180|
|date|(day Of year) 0.6 Maturity 1.2 . group|

| |C| | | | | | | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| |235| | | | | | | | | |
| |230| | | | | | | | | |
| |2 225| | | | | | | | | |
| |2 220| | | | | | | | | |
| |6 215| | | | | | | | | |
| |210| |8.0 1 594| | | | | | | |
| | | | | | | |592| |1.6 8.0| |
| |205| | |588| | | | | | |
| |130| | | | | | | |group| |
| | |Planting|140 150 160 170 180| | | | | | | |
| | |Planting| | | | | | |1.0| |
| |date (day . Of year)|0.6 0.8| | | | | | | | |
| | | | | | | | | |Maturity|date (day = Of year) Maturity|

acids was negatively correlated (r = –0.70) with protein, whereas for non-essentials, the correlation was positive (r = 0.83). Given the importance of the relative concentrations of amino acids on soybean quality, these results imply that protein content alone may not be the most appropriate quality indicator. Other interesting responses involve the correlations among fatty acids. Positive correlations were detected among palmitic, stearic, and oleic contents and also between linoleic and linolenic contents. However, palmitic, stearic, and oleic contents were negatively correlated with linoleic and linolenic. Additionally, positive correlations among raffinose, stachyose, and sucrose were observed. Overall, across environmental conditions and management decisions, higher seed yield was correlated with high protein and oil contents but with lower linoleic, linolenic, and sucrose contents. These results underline the complexity of the soybean yield-composition relationships and further justify an in-depth examination of environmental and management factors that can affect them.

# Planting Date × Maturity group Effects

Late planting of all MGs resulted in the greatest protein concentrations. The opposite response was observed for oil content in that early planting resulted in the greatest oil amount. Both protein and oil were affected mainly by PD and, to a lesser degree, by MG. The observed trend of higher protein and lower oil due to late planting is consistent with a previous study (Helms et al., 1990). Because of the inverse relationship of protein and oil, the response curve for the sum was curvilinear across PD and showed a maximum at mid-May PD’s. These results suggest that a single combination of planting Date and MG selection were important factors for soybean seed protein and oil content and their sum (Fig. 1B–1D).

Across the examined region, large yield variability was observed due to PD and MG combinations (Fig. 1A). The figure shows the yield response for several PD × MG combinations and shows that the greatest seed yield resulted from early planting (late April–early May) and MG 2. This result agrees with the highest-yielding MG identified by Mourtzinis and Conley (2017) for the same region. In that study, MG 1.4 to 2.2 resulted in the highest yields.
# Agronomy Journal

# Volume 109, Issue 5

# 2017

|(A) sum of essential amino acids (as % of the sum of 18 amino acids)|(B) sum|(C) sum|
|---|---|---|
|(D) sum of non-protein amino acids (g kg)|(E) oleic acid (g kg)|(F) linoleic acid (g kg)|
|(G) linolenic acid (g kg)|(H) palmitic acid (g kg)|(I) stearic acid (g kg)|
|(J) raffinose (g kg)|(K) stachyose (g kg)|(L) sucrose (g kg)|

Fig. 2. Maturity group × planting date (as day of year) response surface of (A) sum of essential amino acids (g kg)
# Management Practices and Soybean Yield

Management practices with the goal of maximizing soybean yield, protein, and oil content may be difficult to attain. Planting a MG 2 in early May was found to maximize seed yield and oil content, but it resulted in the lowest observed protein content.

Soybean seed constituents respond to PDs and MGs in complex ways. For example, essential amino acids follow the same response as protein to the PD × MG combinations we tested. However, their sum, as a percentage of total 18 amino acids, follows the opposite trend. Additionally, the concentrations of the five fatty acids exhibited different responses to variable PD × MG combinations, whereas sugar content responses were similar. Early planting was associated with lower protein and linolenic acid, and higher oil, oleic acid, and sugar contents. Our results contradict those from Jaureguy et al. (2013) in Arkansas who associated early plantings with high protein seed content. Nevertheless, in that study, researchers used breeding lines with modified seed composition. These findings further highlight the complexity of the impact of soybean management on seed composition; PDs and MGs should be chosen based on the product’s end use (yield vs. seed composition).

# Temperature × Maturity Group Effects

Across all environments included in the study, and depending on the PD, T5 to T8 ranged between 14 and 22°C. The negative correlation between T5 to T8 and PD (r = –0.39, P < 0.0001) suggests that temperature had a significant effect on the resulting soybean seed yield and composition. We found multiple constituents which showed a large variability in their responses to management decisions and temperature variations.

# Figures

|A|B|
|---|---|
|||

|C|D|
|---|---|
|||

Fig. 3. Maturity group × air temperature between R5 and R8 growth stages response surface of (A) yield (kg ha–1), (B) protein (g kg–1), (C) oil (g kg –1), and (D) protein+oil (g kg–1).

Agronomy Journal • Volume 109, Issue 5 • 2017
2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ), (B) sum of essential amino acids (as % of the sum of 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2                                                                                                                                              ), (H) palmitic
                                                                                                                  ~                                                                                                                      1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8                                                                             1                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               –1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ), (G) linolenic acid (g kg
                                                                                                                                  8 J                                                                                                                      ~ 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          & 2                                              8 ~ 8
                                                                                                                                2                                                                                                            8     L                                                                                  2          J
                                                                                                                            2                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                         F                                                                                                          F                                                                                          F
         O                                                                                                            9                    I                                                                                      2                                                                                          2
                                                   2             2              2                           8                                                 4 8 ?                         2              2           "2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0                                                8                                        8                R           8                                                    8        8     1 4  –1
                    (6x                                                               6) spije oulue ulajoud-UON                                                                                                                                                                  (,6x 6) asojons                                                              ), (F) linoleic acid (g kg
                                                                                                                                                                (-6x 6) oujed                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                    2                                                                                                         2                                                                                        No
                                                                                                            7
                                                                                                            ~                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ~                                                                                             1                         –1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fig. 4. Maturity group × air temperature between R5 and R8 growth stages response surface of (A) sum of essential amino acids (g kg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               –1
                                                                                                                                     ~ 8                                                                                                                                                                                                 8 2                   ), (E) oleic acid (g kg
                                                                                                                              9                                                                                                                       8                                                                                                                       L                                                                                                                                                8                                                       ~ 2        L             2                                                     L
                                                                                                                          9                                                                                                              9                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                       F                                                                                                             @                                                                                          F
                                                                                                                     2                                                                                                            F                                                                                           2
        0                                                                                                 8 2                                                                                                                  2                                                                                   8 Q                                         –1).                                                                                                                                                                     –1
                                                     8               8       8           8                                                                                                                                                                           8 (,6x 6) asoKypeis                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1 3                                      4                9                3             ), (D) sum of non-protein amino acids (g kg                          ), and (L) sucrose (g kg
                 (,6x 6) spioe oulwue Ielluassa-UON                                                                                               3           8            8             8       8      8           8
                                                                                                                                                                    6x 6) oiuajoui7                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                             4 ~                                                                                                                   1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Nao                                                                                   2                ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2                                                                                                    8o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          –1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ), (K) stachyose (g kg
                                                                                                                                 8 L                                                                                                                     & 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~ 2                                              8 8
                                                                                                                      9                                                                                                                         F                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               F                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9                                                                            2                                       8                                                    L        F                                     9  2  L
           0                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2                                                                                             0
                                                                           3                               8                                                                                                                                                                                                    53 Q                                           –1–1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               amino acids), (C) sum of non-essential amino acids (g kg
                                                               0        0          2                                                              8            8            8            8      8     8            8                                                                                                                                                      ), (J) raffinose (g kg
                                   (SVV 81 Jo uns J0 % se)                                                                                                     (,6x 6) %1a1ou17                                                                                           (,x 6) asouiiey
                                              spize ouilue Ieiquass3
                                                                                              No                                                                                                     2     2                                                                                       No                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                               7 8                                                                                                                     1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1                                                  ~                                                           1                 2
                                                                                                                               P0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         –1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ), (I) stearic acid (g kg
                                                                                                                                      & 2                                                                                              8 L 8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ~                                                 ~ 8
                                                                                                                                   8 L                                                                                                                                                                                             8          ]
                                                                                                                                2                                                                                                   2                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                             9                                                                                                   9                                                                                            9
                                                                                                                          F                                                                                                   F                                                                                           F
                                                                                                                      9                                                                                                    @                                                                                           e                                                  –1
                                                                                                                                              8 % 8 8 8 8 ? 8 8                                                                                                                                                                                                           acid (g kg
                                       8 8 & 8 % & 8 % %                                                                                                                                                                                                        8 8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          88888538? 9
                                  6x 6) spipe oujue Ielluass3                                                                                                             6x 6) 31810                                                                                                6x 6) puea1s
Agronomy Journal                                                                               •               Volume 109, Issue 5                                                    •        2017                                                                                                                                                                         9
# CONCLUSIONS

The work presented here has important implications for simple and cost-neutral, yet important, soybean management recommendations to farmers in the northern Corn Belt. Planting date and MG decisions can greatly affect yield and composition, and therefore, significantly increase or suppress overall farm profitability. The results show that the combination of early planting (late April–early May) and using the longest maturity group (MG 2) had the highest yield, oil, and oleic acid potential across the examined region. However, if a seed with high protein content is the overarching goal, a compromise in lower seed yield may be necessary.

# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors wish to thank John Gaska, Adam Roth, and Dimitri von Ruckert for their technical support and Dr. Jill Miller-Garvin for her critical review. We would also like to thank the Wisconsin Soybean Marketing Board, DuPont Pioneer, and the University of Wisconsin-Madison, College of Agricultural and Life Sciences for funding this research.

# REFERENCES

Boerma, H.R., and J.E. Specht, editors. 2004. Soybeans: Improvement, production, and uses. 3rd ed. ASA, CSSA, and SSSA, Madison, WI. doi:10.1016/j.agsy.2004.06.006

Bowley, S. 2008. A hitchhiker’s guide to statistics in plant biology. 2nd ed. Any Old Subject Books, a division of Plants et al., Guelph, ON, Canada.

Brumm, T.J., and C.R. Hurburgh. 2006. Changes in long-term soybean compositional patterns. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 83:981–983. doi:10.1007/s11746-006-5056-4

Carrera, C., M.J. Martinez, J. Dardanelli, and M. Balzarini. 2011. Environmental variation and correlation of seed components in nontransgenic soybeans: Protein, oil, unsaturated fatty acids, tocopherols, and isoflavones. Crop Sci. 51:800–809. doi:10.2135/cropsci2010.06.0314

Conley, S.P., E.M. Cullen, V. Davis, P. Esker, and C. Laboski. 2012. Soybean yield limiting factors in Wisconsin. Coop. Ext. Serv. Univ. of Wisconsin–Madison. www.coolbean.info/library/documents/WI_Soybean_Pocket_Guide.pdf (accessed 19 June 2017)

Conley, S.P., and J.B. Santini. 2007. Crop management practices in Indiana soybean production systems. www.plantmanagementnetwork.org/cm/. Crop Manage. doi:10.1094/CM-2007-0104-01-RS

Davis, V.M., B. Jensen, G. Nice, M. Renz, and D. Smith. 2015. Pest management in Wisconsin field crops. Coop. Ext. Serv. A-3646. Univ. of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison.

De Bruin, J.L., and P. Pedersen. 2008. Soybean seed yield response to planting date and seeding rate in the upper Midwest. Agron. J. 100:696–703. doi:10.2134/agronj2007.0115

Gaspar, A.P., and S.P. Conley. 2015. Responses of canopy reflectance, light interception, and soybean seed yield to replanting suboptimal stands. Crop Sci. 55(1):377–385. doi:10.2135/cropsci2014.03.0200

Gibson, L.R., and R.E. Mullen. 1996. Soybean seed composition under high day and night growth temperatures. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 73:733–737. doi:10.1007/BF02517949

Helms, T.C., C.R. Hurburgh Jr., R.L. Lussenden, and D.A. Whited. 1990. Economic analysis of increased protein and decreased yield due to delayed planting of soybean. J. Prod. Agric. 3:367–371. doi:10.2134/jpa1990.0367

Howell, R.W., and J.L. Cartter. 1958. Physiological factors affecting composition of soybeans: II. Response of oil and other constituents of soybeans to temperature under controlled conditions. Agron. J. 50:664–667. doi:10.2134/agronj1958.00021962005000110007x

Hurburgh, C., Jr., T. Brumm, J. Guinn, and R. Hartwig. 1990. Protein and oil patterns in U.S. and world soybean markets. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 67:966–973. doi:10.1007/BF02541859

Jaureguy, L.M., F.L. Rodriguez, L. Zhang, P. Chen, K. Brye, D. Oosterhuis et al. 2013. Planting date and delayed harvest effects on soybean seed composition. Crop Sci. 53:2162–2175. doi:10.2135/cropsci2012.12.0683

Kane, M.V., C.C. Steele, L.J. Grabau, C.T. MacKown, and D.F. Hildebrand. 1997. Early-maturing soybean cropping systems: III. Protein and oil contents and oil composition. Agron. J. 89:464–469. doi:10.2134/agronj97.00021962008900030016x

Kucharik, C.J., S.P. Serbin, S. Vavrus, E.J. Hopkins, and M.M. Motew. 2010. Patterns of climate change across Wisconsin from 1950 to 2006. Phys. Geogr. 31:1–28.

Littell, R.C., G.A. Milliken, W.A. Stroup, R.D. Wolfinger, and O. Schabenberger. 2006. SAS for mixed models. 2nd ed. SAS Inst., Cary, NC.

Liu, K. 1997. Soybeans chemistry, technology, and utilization. Chapman & Hall, New York.

Marburger, D.A., D.L. Smith, and S.P. Conley. 2016. Revisiting planting date and cultivar effects on soybean sudden death syndrome development and yield loss. Plant Dis. 100:2152–2157. doi:10.1094/PDIS-12-15-1411-RE

Mourtzinis, S., and S.P. Conley. 2017. Delineating soybean maturity groups across the US. Agron. J. 109:1–7. doi:10.2134/agronj2016.10.0581

Mourtzinis, S., J.E. Specht, L.E. Lindsey, W.J. Wiebold, J. Ross, E.D. Nafziger et al. 2015. Climate-induced reduction in US-wide soybean yields underpinned by region- and in-season specific responses. Nature Plants 1: Article no. 14026. doi:10.1038/nplants.2014.26

Naeve, S.L., and S.C. Huerd. 2008. Year, region, and temperature effects on the quality of Minnesota’s soybean crop. Agron. J. 100:690–695. doi:10.2134/agronj2007.0204

Roth, A.C., S.P. Conley, and J.M. Gaska. 2014. Wisconsin soybean variety test results. Coop. Ext. Serv. A-3654. Univ. of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison.

Rotundo, J.L., J.E. Miller, and S.L. Naeve. 2016. Regional and temporal variation in soybean seed protein and oil across the United States. Crop Sci. 56:797–808. doi:10.2135/cropsci2015.06.0394

Salmerón, M., E.E. Gbur, F.M. Bourland, N.W. Buehring, L. Earnest, F.B. Fritschi et al. 2014. Soybean maturity group choices for early and late plantings in the mid-south. Agron. J. 106:1893–1901. doi:10.2134/agronj14.0222

Salmerón, M., E.E. Gbur, F.M. Bourland, L. Earnest, B.R. Golden, and L.C. Purcell. 2015. Soybean maturity group choices for maximizing radiation interception across planting dates in the Midsouth United States. Agron. J. 107:2132–2142. doi:10.2134/agronj15.0091

Scott, W.O., and S.R. Aldrich. 1970. Modern soybean production. 1st ed. S & A Publ. Inc, Champaign, IL.

Thomas, J.M.G., K.J. Boote, L.H. Allen, M. Gallo-Meagher, and J.M. Davis. 2003. Elevated temperatures and carbon dioxide effects on soybean seed composition and transcript abundance. Crop Sci. 43:1548–1557. doi:10.2135/cropsci2003.1548

Wilson, R.F. 2004. Seed composition. In: H.R. Boerma and J.E. Specht, editors, Soybeans: Improvement, production, and uses. ASA, CSSA, SSSA, Madison, WI. p. 621–677.

Wolf, R.B., J.F. Cavins, R. Kleiman, and L.T. Black. 1982. Effect of temperature on soybean seed constituents: Oil, protein, moisture, fatty acids, amino acids and sugars. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 59:230–232. doi:10.1007/BF02582182

Yaklich, R., and B. Vinyard. 2004. A method to estimate soybean seed protein and oil concentration before harvest. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 81:1021–1027. doi:10.1007/s11746-004-1016-2

Zhang, L.X., S. Kyei-Boahen, J. Zhang, M.H. Zhang, T.B. Freeland, C.E. Watson, and X.M. Liu. 2007. Modifications of optimum adaptation zones for soybean maturity groups in the USA. www.plantmanagementnetwork.org/cm/. Crop Manage. 6:1. doi:10.1094/CM-2007-0927-01-RS