# Early‐Season Pests of Soybean in the United States and Factors That Affect Their Risk of Infestation

Louis S. Hesler,1,4 K. Clint Allen,2 Randall G. Luttrell,2 Thomas W. Sappington, and Sharon K. Papiernik1

1 North Central Agricultural Research Laboratory, Agricultural Research Service, USDA, Brookings, SD 57006, 2USDA, Agricultural Research Service, Southern Insect Management Research Unit, Stoneville, MS 38776, USDA, Agricultural Research Service, Corn Insects and Crop Genetics Research Unit, Genetics Laboratory, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, and Corresponding author, e-mail: louis.hesler@ars.usda.gov

Subject Editor: Christopher Sansone

Received 12 July 2017; Editorial decision 6 October 2017

# Abstract

Soybean faces potential economic damage from a wide variety of early‐season invertebrate pests. The objective of this article was to determine the extent and intensity of nine early‐season soybean insect pests targeted for control by insecticidal seed treatments in the United States and to identify various management options for them: bean leaf beetle (Cerotoma trifurcate Förster, Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae); grape colaspis, Colaspis brunnea (F.) (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae); leafhoppers (Hemiptera: Ciccadellidae); seedcorn maggot, Delia platura (Meigen) (Diptera: Anthomyiidae); soybean aphid (Aphis glycines Matsumura, Hemiptera: Aphididae); threecornered alfalfa hopper, Spsistilus festinus (Say) (Hemiptera: Membracidae); thrips (Thysanoptera: Thripidae); white grubs (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae); and wireworms (Coleoptera: Elateridae). Seedcorn maggot, white grubs, and wireworms have been limited to a relatively small proportion of soybean fields with readily defined factors regarding their risk. However, questions about the pest status of the other six pests were identified. Bean leaf beetle, which vectors Bean pod mottle virus to soybean, has been present across major soybean‐production regions, but frequency and proportion of soybean fields that economically impacted is not adequately documented. The impact of threecornered alfalfa hopper and thrips on soybean productivity varied within regions, but specific reasons for the variation were unclear. Early‐season management of grape colaspis and leafhoppers has been infrequent, but factors that promoted economic injury and the need for management in specific fields were undetermined. Although early‐season management of soybean aphid has not proven feasible for individual fields, questions remain regarding its management in fields near overwintering stands and the possibility for areawide suppression.

# Key words:

integrated pest management (IPM), crop protection, agricultural entomology, Glycine max

# Soybean (Glycine max [L.] Merr.)

is the second largest field crop in the United States, with over 75 million acres planted per year since 2009 (ERS 2017). The crop is grown predominantly in the eastern half of the country, and principally in inland states that are drained by the Mississippi River and its tributaries; most of the remaining acreage falls within the Atlantic and Gulf Coast states (Way 1994, NASS 2016).

Soybean fields in the United States collectively contain an amazing diversity of >700 herbivorous invertebrate species (Way 1994, Steffey 2015). For management purposes, these herbivores can be categorized according to pest status (Kogan and Turnipseed 1987, Steffey 2015). About 20 species or species complexes of herbivorous arthropods are considered to be significant economic pests, according to surveys of research and extension entomologists from the major soybean-producing states of the United States in 2009 and 2014 (Steffey 2015). Another 20 species/species complexes of arthropods are categorized as occasional or sporadic pests of soybean (Steffey 2015). Additional ≈10 species are considered infrequent pests, and the remaining species of herbivorous arthropods are considered nonpests of soybean (Kogan and Turnipseed 1987, Higley and Boethel 1994).

Pest status of herbivorous arthropods in soybean depends on several factors. For instance, pest status may be seasonally dependent, with arthropods capable of causing damage during early-season soybean production, mid- to late season, or sometimes both (Steffey et al. 1994). For example, the seedcorn maggot [Delia platura (Meigen), Diptera: Anthomyiidae] is strictly an early-season pest from immediately after sowing through early seedling stages (Higley and Hammond 1994), whereas stink bugs (Hemiptera: Pentatomidae) are late-season pests that feed on soybean pods (Greene and Davis 2015). The bean leaf beetle (Cerotoma trifurcata Förster, Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) is an example of an arthropod.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Entomological Society of America 2018. This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the public domain in the US. This Open Access article contains public sector information licensed under the Open Government Licence v2.0 (http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open‐government‐licence/version/2/).
# Journal of Integrated Pest Management, 2018, Vol. 9, No. 1

pest that can be potentially problematic in soybean throughout the growing season (Lundgren and Musser 2015). In addition, arthropod pest status depends on geography. Several researchers have noted that pest status of particular arthropods varies among different soybean production regions (Lambert and Tyler 1999, Steffey 2015) and even among states within a given production region (Musser et al. 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017; Steffey 2015). Of course, this is due, in part, to the extent that an arthropod’s geographic distribution overlaps with particular areas of soybean production (Kogan and Turnipseed 1987, Higley and Boethel 1994). However, several species of widely distributed arthropod pests can be economically significant in some soybean production areas but not others (Steffey 2015), indicating that other, sometimes undetermined factors influence pest status.

Knowledge that an arthropod’s pest status varies within the growing season and by geography informs soybean growers and pest management practitioners of the time of season and places in which a particular arthropod could potentially be an economic threat to soybean production. Once pests have been identified for a particular area, then informed decisions about how to best manage the pest are also needed. A variety of management tactics can be used against arthropod pests of soybean, including the exploitation of natural enemies, crop management practices, host plant resistance, and the use of insecticides (Todd et al. 1994). Many of the tactics (e.g., insecticide seed treatment, modified planting date, elimination of alternate host plants, trap cropping) are used proactively to prevent economic pest levels, whereas others (e.g., foliar insecticide sprays, inundative release of a biocontrol agent) can be employed responsively when sampling indicates pest levels that threaten economic damage to soybean. Ideally, management decisions are based on systematic sampling of soybean pests and knowledge about infestation levels that cause economic damage (Todd et al. 1994). However, especially with early-season pests, management decisions are based on the history of pest problems or on perceived risks of economic pest problems in a particular field.

Recently, insecticidal treatment of soybean seed has greatly increased as a means of preventing economic damage from early-season pests, with more than half of soybean acreage planted to insecticide-treated seed in many production areas (Hodgson et al. 2012a, USGS 2014, Hurley and Mitchell 2016). Soybean seed is treated primarily with either of two neonicotinoid insecticides, imidacloprid, or thiamethoxam (USGS 2014, Douglas and Tooker 2015). Commercial products containing one of these insecticides for seed treatment have been registered in order to protect soybean plants from nine insect pests or pest complexes: the bean leaf beetle; seedcorn maggot; soybean aphid, Aphis glycines Matsumura (Hemiptera: Aphididae); grape colaspis, Colaspis brunnea (F.) (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae); leafhoppers (Hemiptera: Ciccadellidae); threecornered alfalfa hopper, Spissistilus festinus (Say) (Hemiptera: Membracidae); thrips (Thysanoptera: Thripidae); white grubs (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae); and wireworms (Coleoptera: Elateridae).

# Selected Early Season Pests of Soybean in the United States

# Bean Leaf Beetle

The bean leaf beetle is widely distributed over the eastern two-thirds of the United States and in south-central and southeastern Canada (Pedigo 1994, Lundgren and Musser 2015). After overwintering, adults emerge to feed upon the cotyledons and leaves of young soybean plants in late spring and early summer (Fig. 1), and females lay eggs in soil at the base of soybean plants (Smelser and Pedigo 1991, 1992). Larvae hatch within a week and feed for 15–30 days on soybean roots (Smelser and Pedigo 1991). Summer generations of adults feed on shoots and on pods when available (Smelser and Pedigo 1992). The number of generations of bean leaf beetle ranges from one at northern latitudes to three per year in the southern United States (Pedigo 1994).

Cumulative consumption of seedling shoot tissue (V1 to V3) by adults can reduce yield by 12% (Hunt et al. 1994). The economic significance of larval feeding on roots is undetermined, but generally considered minimal; heavy infestations (19 larvae per plant) substantially reduce nitrogenous assimilates within soybean shoots (Lundgren and Riedell 2008). More important than direct feeding damage, adult bean leaf beetles can transmit various plant pathogenic viruses including Bean pod mottle virus (BPMV), Cowpea mosaic virus, Cowpea chlorotic mottle virus, and Southern bean mosaic virus (Boethel 2004). BPMV reduces yield from 3 to 52%, depending on soybean variety and time of infection, with severity generally greatest when infection occurs at early growth stages of soybean development (Gergerich and Domier 2015). It is particularly widespread in major soybean production regions (Giesler et al. 2002), and bean leaf beetle is its main vector (Gergerich and Domier 2015). BPMV decreases pod formation and seed size, number, and weight (Gergerich and Domier 2015).

The nine early-season pests targeted for control by planting insecticide-treated soybean seed were among the 20 most economically significant pests identified through survey results reported by Steffey (2015). Survey results also established that pest status for eight of the nine insect pests varied by soybean-growing region, with at least four early-season pests considered economically significant in each region (Steffey 2015). Despite a lack of information at times about the actual levels of risk within a particular soybean field from any of these pests, the aggregate risk to soybean posed by four or more of these early-season pests to fields within each region has arguably provided impetus for the extensive use of insecticide-treated seed (Musser et al. 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017).
# Journal of Integrated Pest Management, 2018, Vol. 9, No. 1

The need for managing early-season bean leaf beetle usually depends on historic prevalence of BPMV in a particular area (Lundgren and Musser 2015) and focuses on minimizing adult feeding. Insecticides are the most reliable means to limit vectoring of BPMV (Krell et al. 2004, Bradshaw et al. 2008). Insecticides can be applied either as a seed treatment or as a foliar spray between emergence and the first trifoliolate stage (Bradshaw et al. 2008). An additional insecticide spray may be necessary to limit BPMV incidence, if high numbers of bean leaf beetles are present in the first summer generation (Krell et al. 2004, 2005; Bradshaw et al. 2008). In areas of historically low BPMV incidence, other management tactics can be viable. Early planting is a risk factor, and thus delaying soybean planting until one of the later recommended dates can decrease colonization by overwintered adults while maintaining yield potential, at least in Iowa (Zeiss and Pedigo 1996). However, delayed planting relative to emergence of overwintering bean leaf beetles was not a consistently useful management tactic for BPMV (Krell et al. 2005). In northern areas, 5–10% of a field can be planted as a trap crop by sowing 2–3 wk earlier than recommended. The trap crop can be treated with insecticide within 2 wk after emergence to kill colonizing bean leaf beetles, and thus limit infestation of adjacent soybean fields planted at recommended dates (Lundgren and Musser 2015).

# Grape Colaspis

The grape colaspis, Colaspis brunnea (F.) (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae), is a small, pale-brown leaf beetle (Fig. 2), whose adults and larvae feed on soybean foliage. In addition, adults feed on a variety of other crops including grape vines, alfalfa, apple, red clover, cowpea, strawberry, and silks of maize (Flint 1941, Rolston and Rouse 1965, Davidson and Peairs 1966). Eggs are laid in irregular clumps slightly underneath the surface of the soil adjacent to the crown of the plant (Lindsay 1943). Females can lay one or two batches of eggs, usually between 50–60 eggs per batch (Lindsay 1943). They overwinter as larvae and the great majority of these moves in the soil below the line of heaviest frost (Bigger 1928). The number of generations depends on its geographic distribution.

# Figures

Fig. 1. A bean leaf beetle (C. trifurcata) and its characteristic chewing damage to a soybean leaf (photo credit: Ward Upham, Kansas State University, Bugwood.org).

Fig. 2. The grape colaspis (C. brunnea), adult (photo credit: Kansas Department of Agriculture, Bugwood.org).
# Journal of Integrated Pest Management, 2018, Vol. 9, No. 1

In Iowa, it was reported to be univoltine (Lindsay 1943), while in northern areas (Poos 1932, DeLong and Caldwell 1935, Specker et al. 1990) it is bivoltine with two separate broods of adults occurring during the summer months (Rolston and Rouse 1965). In North Carolina, Eaton (1978) reported a single generation in the summer and a partial generation in the fall. Adults usually not only feed at the lateral margin of the host plant leaf, but also can begin at any point between the leaf margin and mid-rib, leaving various shaped holes in the leaf (Lindsay 1943). Adults are also vectors of BPMV (Gergerich and Domier 2015). Grape colaspis larvae injure crops by feeding on the surface of the root, removing root hairs which interfere with water and nutrient uptake (Lindsay 1943).

Larvae tend to be randomly distributed within soybean fields, but damage occurs in localized areas (Eaton 1978). Loose soils that hold higher amounts of moisture are associated with higher numbers of grape colaspis. Other risk factors associated with grape colaspis larval populations include no-till fields (Tonhasca 1994) and fields that were planted with soybean the previous year (Flint 1941).

One of the first reports of grape colaspis in soybean was that of a single overwintering larva in a soybean field in Illinois (Bigger 1928). Much of the literature regarding grape colaspis in soybean describes it as an occasional pest, but authors do not always specify which stage of the insect was sampled (larva or adult). Kogan and Turnipseed (1987) noted grape colaspis adults as incidental pests in soybean, while Lambert (1994) noted that adults and larvae are common in soybean fields, but seldom economically damaging. Only a few adults were collected in 1 of 3 years in southeastern Texas, and it was listed as an occasional pest (Drees and Rice 1990). Grape colaspis was observed feeding on soybean in Maryland but caused no apparent economic damage (Ratcliffe et al. 1960).

Reports of serious economic damage include 10–50% stand reduction over thousands of soybean acres in Illinois from 1938 through 1940 (Flint 1941). Mayse and Tugwell (1980) also noted an increase in early-season stand reductions in soybean and rice fields caused by grape colaspis larvae in the Arkansas Delta during the 1970s. Nevertheless, recent surveys of pest management professionals in seven southern and Atlantic states (Alabama, Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia) attributed ≤0.3% loss of yield and control costs to grape colaspis (Musser et al. 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017). Farmers surveyed in 2013 failed to list grape colaspis as a pest for which they actively managed (Hurley and Mitchell 2016).

There are no rescue treatments in soybean for damaging larval populations in the soil. Nonseed treatment management tactics include fall or early spring cultivation and delayed planting (Flint 1941). Kaeb (2006) reported that one or two pyrethroid applications later in the growing season reduced adult numbers in soybean plots, which decreased numbers of larvae in those plots the following year.

# Leafhoppers

Leafhoppers are a type of insect with piercing-sucking mouthparts (Hemiptera: Cicadellidae), and many species feed on a wide variety (sometimes >100 species) of plants, including soybean (Helm et al. 1980, Borror et al. 1989). The potato leafhopper, Empoasca fabae (Harris), is considered the primary leafhopper in a complex of seven or so species that feeds on soybean in the United States (Blickenstaff and Huggans 1962, Kincade et al. 1970, Tugwell et al. 1973). It is generally distributed and abundant over the eastern United States, and occurs at low densities in western states (Beyer 1922, DeLong 1938, Helm et al. 1980). Potato leafhopper overwinters as an adult in southern states on various host plants (Beyer 1922, Helm et al. 1980, Taylor and Shields 1995). It is not known to overwinter in northern states.

# Seedcorn Maggot

The seedcorn maggot is a fly whose larval stage damages the germinating seeds of various crops, including soybean (Hodgson et al. 2012c). Feeding can destroy the growing tip of soybean, which results in plants with two main stems (Higley and Hammond).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jipm/article/9/1/19/5033784 by guest on 13 January 2025
# Journal of Integrated Pest Management, 2018, Vol. 9, No. 1

Injury can delay seedling emergence and thereby increase the risk of reduced emergence from damping-off diseases (Higley and Hammond 1994). The maggots can hollow out seeds, leading to seed death and significantly reduced plant stand. Soybean can typically compensate for substantial stand reduction without yield loss, but heavy infestations of seedcorn maggot, though rare, can cause complete or nearly complete stand loss (Higley and Hammond 1994).

# Soybean Aphid

The soybean aphid has been recognized as a pest of soybean in North America since its detection in the north-central United States in 2000 (Alleman et al. 2002, Venette and Ragsdale 2004). It has spread to at least 30 states and 3 Canadian provinces, but it is a soybean pest only at middle and northern latitudes in the continental interior (Ragsdale et al. 2011). In 2009 and 2013 surveys, soybean aphid was considered one of the most significant insect pests of soybean in the Midwest, Great Plains, and Mid-South production regions (Steffey 2015). According to survey results from 2013, 38.2% of soybean farmers from 14 states actively managed for soybean aphid, and 31.0% considered it as the most important pest (Hurley and Mitchell 2016).

Management of soybean aphid is confined overwhelmingly to northern soybean-producing states (Ragsdale et al. 2011, Bahlai et al. 2015), as only an extremely small fraction of acreage has been treated for this pest in southern states (Musser et al. 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017).

Rapid population growth of soybean aphid on soybean is facilitated by asexual reproduction (Ragsdale et al. 2004), and under favorable weather conditions, doubling time can be as short as 6 d (Ragsdale et al. 2007, McCornack et al. 2008). Roughly 15 generations can occur on soybean plants within a growing season (McCornack et al. 2004, McCornack et al. 2008). In late summer, soybean aphids migrate from soybean plants to buckthorn (Rhamnus spp.), where sexual reproduction occurs in the fall. Eggs overwinter, hatch in spring, and two parthenogenetic generations develop on buckthorn (Ragsdale et al. 2004). By late spring and early summer, winged, parthenogenetic spring migrants leave buckthorn and colonize soybean plants (Ragsdale et al. 2004). However, soybean aphid is difficult to detect on early-season soybean, especially as alternate secondary hosts that are available in late spring and early summer (Clark et al. 2006).

Soybean aphids prefer to feed on the stems and undersides of leaves (Fig. 3), especially newly expanding trifoliate leaves (McCornack et al. 2008). Soybean aphid directly causes injury from large populations that feed on sap and draw assimilates and other nutrients from soybean plants (Macedo et al. 2003, Chandran et al. 2013), and this feeding can cause economic damage at high densities. Feeding under heavy infestation can stunt plant growth, negatively impact the number of pods, and reduce seed size and quality (Beckendorf et al. 2008).

Fig. 3. Soybean aphids (A. glycines) infesting leaves and stems of soybean plants (photo credit: Eric Beckendorf).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jipm/article/9/1/19/5033784 by guest on 13 January 2025
# Journal of Integrated Pest Management, 2018, Vol. 9, No. 1

Ultimately lowering yield up to 40% (Ragsdale et al. 2007). Soybean aphid is also an indirect pest of soybean through its ability to vector various viruses such as Soybean mosaic virus, although the presence of soybean aphid in the United States has not significantly increased incidence of this virus (Pedersen et al. 2007).

Infestations of soybean aphid can reach levels that require insecticide application to preserve yield (Johnson et al. 2009, Ragsdale et al. 2011), and treatment decisions for soybean aphid are made during the reproductive stages of soybean (Ragsdale et al. 2007). Decisions regarding insecticide applications are based on the number of aphids per plant between early bloom (R1) to beginning seed set (R5) (Ragsdale et al. 2007). Despite economic threshold guidelines (Ragsdale et al. 2007), prophylactic insecticide seed treatment, prophylactic foliar sprays, or both have been widely used against soybean aphid (Hodgson et al. 2012a,b; Douglas and Tooker 2015).

However, application of insecticide based on weekly scouting and adherence to an economic threshold increases the profitability of soybean production over no application and prophylactic application (Johnson et al. 2009, Krupke et al. 2017).

Seed treatment of soybean with neonicotinoids may be used in soybean to control early-season colonization by soybean aphid, but the unfeasible use of prophylactic insecticide seed treatments against soybean aphid in individual fields has been attributed to the lack of residual efficacy to protect soybean from mid- to late-season colonization by soybean aphid (McCornack and Ragsdale 2006, Johnson et al. 2008, Krupke et al. 2017). However, as the risk of early-season colonization is greater for fields near buckthorn stands (Bahlai et al. 2010), it is conceivable that insecticide seed treatments might be useful in such fields. In addition, despite the limited period of soybean aphid suppression from insecticide seed treatment in individual fields, Bahlai et al. (2015) found that increased usage of imidacloprid and thiamethoxam between 2005 and 2011 in four Midwestern states was correlated with a decline in soybean aphid infestation. They suggested that preemption of aphid colonization within soybean fields planted with insecticide-treated seed might have sufficiently curbed early-season population growth of soybean aphids to effect season-long suppression at the landscape scale. Nonetheless, the validity of using insecticide seed treatments to manage soybean aphid higher risk fields and their ability to provide areawide suppression of soybean aphid remain untested.

# Threecornered Alfalfa Hopper

The threecornered alfalfa hopper, Spissistilus festinus (Say) (Hemiptera: Membracidae), is about ⅛ to ¼ in. long and green with a triangular shaped dorsum (Beyer et al. 2017). Adults and nymphs are similar in appearance, but nymphs have dorsal spines and lack wings. Threecornered alfalfa hopper is distributed throughout the entire southern and southwestern United States and lesser numbers occur in the northern United States and southern Canada (Osborn 1911, Wildermuth 1915, Caldwell 1949).

Threecornered alfalfa hopper feeds on a variety of plants but prefers legumes, including alfalfa, soybean, cowpeas, and various clovers. It also feeds on trees, shrubs, herbs, and grasses (Wildermuth 1915). Threecornered alfalfa hopper overwinters as an adult in a state of reproductive diapause (Newsom et al. 1983) but can remain active in warmer climates or during mild winters (Wildermuth 1915). Developmental time depends on host plant and temperature but takes approximately 35 d from oviposition to adult molt (Meisch and Randolph 1965, Mitchell and Newsom 1984). Two to three generations can occur on soybean during a growing season (Mueller 1980, Mitchell and Newsom 1984). Adults are long lived, and females can produce more than 220 offspring during a mean reproductive lifespan of 38 d (Mitchell and Newsom 1984).
# Journal of Integrated Pest Management, 2018, Vol. 9, No. 1

# Damage inflicted by three-cornered alfalfa hopper to soybean

Midwest and Great Plains (Steffey 2015). Inconsistency among state management guides indicates that its pest status varies among Mid-South and Atlantic states, and recent studies suggest pest status of three-cornered alfalfa hopper has declined in early-soybean production systems in those regions (Beyer et al. 2017). Nonetheless, three-cornered alfalfa hopper has been present in a large majority of soybean fields in Alabama, Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Tennessee in recent years, and it has diminished soybean production by roughly 25% due to yield loss and control costs in some years in those states (Musser et al. 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017).

The point of feeding varies with growth stage of the soybean plant. Early in plant development, girdling occurs low on the main stem (Fig. 4). Most girdling that causes lodging happens when plants are &lt;25 cm tall (Bailey et al. 1970).

Girdling of soybean by three-cornered alfalfa hoppers has the potential to cause economic damage. On a per area basis, Mueller and Dumas (1975) reported approximately 60% of plants girdled low on the main stem early in the season did not survive until harvest, and mean yields from girdled plants were significantly lower than those from plants that were not girdled. However, appreciable yield loss on a per area basis does not occur until approximately 65 to 70% of soybean plants were girdled (Mueller and Jones 1983).

Various factors influence population levels of three-cornered alfalfa hopper in soybean fields. Wild hosts, including clover and vetch, can aid in the build-up early-season populations of three-cornered alfalfa hopper that infest these fields (Mitchell and Newsom 1984). In Texas, Rice and Drees (1985) noted adults girdling plants immediately after plant emergence and main stem girdles exceeded 85% in some fields. Planting date can also impact numbers infesting a particular field. In earlier planted soybeans, three-cornered alfalfa hoppers were more common during June through August than in later plantings (Baur et al. 2000, McPherson et al. 2001) and exceeded the economic threshold more frequently (Baur et al. 2000). However, Mueller and Dumas (1975) noted that late-planted soybeans could be more susceptible to early girdling damage to the main stem. Soybean fields that have below-optimum plant populations appear to be at greatest risk of economic damage by this insect.

# Thrips

Thrips (Thysanoptera: Thripidae) are elongate, small (1/16 in. long) insects with rasping-sucking mouthparts. Various species of phytophagous thrips can be found in soybean fields in the United States (Blickenstaff and Huggans 1962, Irwin et al. 1979, Irwin and Yeargan 1980, Reisig et al. 2012, Bloomingdale et al. 2017). Four species are typically common in soybean, depending on geographic location: the soybean thrips Neohydatothrips variabilis (Beach); flower thrips, Frankliniella tritici (Fitch); tobacco thrips, Frankliniella fusca (Hinds); and western flower thrips, Frankliniella occidentalis (Pergrande).

Fig. 4. Damage to early season soybean by three‐cornered alfalfa hopper (Spissistilus festinus) (photo credit: John C. French Sr., Universities: Auburn, GA, Clemson and U of MO, Bugwood.org).
# Journal of Integrated Pest Management, 2018, Vol. 9, No. 1

Soybean thrips has six developmental life stages: egg, first instar larva, second instar larva, prepupa, pupa, and adult (Irwin and Yeargan 1980). At 22°C, the period from egg hatch to takes ~11 d (Vance 1974). Larvae are almost always found on the underside of leaves and never move far from the hatching site (Vance 1974). Prepupae and pupae occur in the soil near the base of the host plant (Vance 1974).

Thrips injure plants by feeding on the surfaces of leaves, stems, buds, and flowers (Pedigo and Rice 2009) and feed on exudate from ruptured plant cells (Mueller and Luttrell 1977). The soybean thrips has been documented to injure soybean, with injury most evident as elongate feeding scars on leaves. Injury is often most severe on young soybean plants, but they usually outgrow the injury (Mueller 1994). Insecticide-treated and untreated soybean plots that differ in thrips damage have not been shown to differ in yield (Mueller and Luttrell 1977, Huckaba et al. 1988, Reisig et al. 2012). Occasionally, young soybean plants die when large populations of soybean thrips occur during hot, dry weather (Mueller 1994).

Thrips are vectors of soybean disease viruses. Soybean thrips is a relatively efficient vector of Soybean vein necrosis virus (SVNV), whereas tobacco thrips and flower thrips are less efficient vectors of the virus (Keough et al. 2006). SVNV is the most widespread soybean virus in the United States (Zhou and Tzanetakis 2013), but its effect on yield is unknown (Hill and Whitham 2014). A 2013 survey of soybean farmers across 14 states did not identify thrips as a pest that is actively managed in soybean fields (Hurley and Mitchell 2016).

Several factors increase the risk of white grub damage in soybean. Risk of economic injury by white grubs is greater in soybean fields that have been converted from pasture. Planting adjacent to willow or cottonwood trees, which serve as adult host plants, also increases white grub infestation in soybean fields (Glogoza et al. 1998). Spring tillage before soybean planting can reduce the number of white grubs near the soil surface (Rice and Riley 1994). Controlling weeds, especially grassy weeds, in the crop preceding soybean can reduce the attractiveness to egg-laying beetles (Metcalf et al. 1962). A soil insecticide or insecticidal seed treatment is recommended when soybean is planted in fields with high risk of true white grub injury (Hodgson et al. 2012c).

# White Grubs

The term ‘white grubs’ refers to two multi-species complexes of polyphagous, root-feeding larvae of scarab beetles (Rice and Riley 1994). True white grubs are the larvae of May and June beetles (Phyllophaga spp., Fig. 5), and annual white grubs are the larvae of masked chafers (Cyclocephala spp.). The life cycle of true white grubs lasts 1–2 yr in southern states and 3–4 yr in northern states, whereas annual white grubs complete their life cycle in 1 yr. Both types of white grubs are uncommon pests of soybean (Rice and Riley 1994, Hodgson et al. 2012c). Of the two, true white grubs are typically more serious and more widespread pests of soybean than annual white grubs (Rice and Riley 1994, Hodgson et al. 2012c).

# Wireworms

Wireworms are soil-dwelling larvae of click beetles (Pedigo and Rice 2009). Several different species of wireworm can be found in soybean fields, including Agriotes mancus (Say) (Coleoptera: Elateridae) (the wheat wireworm), Limonius dubitans LeConte (Coleoptera: Elateridae), and Melanotus spp. (Coleoptera: Elateridae) (Wintersteen 2009).

Fig. 5. Larval instars of a white grub (Phyllophaga sp.) (photo credit: Steven Katovich, USDA Forest Service, Bugwood.org).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jipm/article/9/1/19/5033784 by guest on 13 January 2025.
# Journal of Integrated Pest Management, 2018, Vol. 9, No. 1

Most important as vector of Potato leafhopper migratory from overwintering areas. Colonization from overwintering host by late spring, higher populations later, mainly via minimizing damage localized within in South making infestation. Soybeans can compensate (increased yield) for substantial stand reduction but most fields beyond seedling stage. Early colonization can result in BPMV adult beetle feeding on seedlings is unclear.

# Management of BPMV

Summary of prevalence, pressure, risk factors, and management options for sporadic pests of seedling soybean listed on labels of neonicotinoid seed treatments.

|Insecticide Treatments|Less profitable than old-based treatments|
|---|---|
|Other|Preventive widely used but thresh-rescue|

Plant small part of field early as trap. Fall or early spring. Pubescent varieties. Resistant cultivars (especially generalist predators).

# Management Options

|Delay planting to latest recom.|Delayed planting|Natural enemies|
|---|---|---|
|Early planting|Delay planting 2–3 wk after cultivation|Rye cover crop|
|Adequate soil potassium|No-till|Rescue treatment?|
|Yes (one or two foliar sprays, before first trifoliate)|No|Yes|

# Historic Prevalence

Spring rainfall that prevents proper 2nd year soybean ation (e.g., cool, moist conditions). Green plants incorporated during potassium deficient.

# Risk Factors

|Warm winter|Early planting|Dry conditions|
|---|---|---|
|Late planting|Smooth-leaf varieties|Loose soils|
|No-till|Manuring| |

# Population Densities

Rare, requires severe rare, locally severe midseason pest, but can colonize some fields with V2–V4 seedlings in low numbers. Greater concern in northern regions <1% of fields, prevalence seldom economic infestation to reduce yield.

# Presence in Seedling Soybean

Occasional to common but timing frequent, sporadic, widespread.

# Common Region of Concern

Eastern 2/3 of North-central United States, widespread; abundant in Arkansas and North Carolina. Potato leafhopper most common in northern latitudes, continental interior.

# Pest

Bean Leaf Beetle
Colaspis
Seedcorn Maggot
Soybean Aphid
# Journal of Integrated Pest Management, 2018, Vol. 9, No. 1

Soybeans can compensate (increased yield) for sub-Can vector soybean viruses this is main reason for lack of consensus EIL stress factors to reduce risk can persist for two seasons after initial infestation. Many species in complex populations. Plants outgrow thrips. True white grubs have substantial stand reduction; annual white grubs of lesser concern.

# Management options

|At-planting insecticide|Other|
|---|---|
|Spring tillage to reduce numbers with good weed control|Fallowing field|
|Shallow spring tillage|Higher planting population|
|Plowing| |

# Rescue treatment?

Yes (but consensus thresholds not established)
No

# Risk factors on hosts (wild and cultivated)

|Dry conditions|Nearby early-sea- cottonwood trees|
|---|---|
|Grassy weeds in previous crop|CR out of pasture|
|Sustained cool spring|Nearby willow or CR out of grassland|
|Early planting|Cool weather|

Neonicotinoid seed treatments are a current management option in all cases, so not listed in table.

# Importance in seedling soybean

|Occasional eco-EIL has been problematic|No evidence for determining the effect on yield, but may be pos-|
|---|---|
|Probable, but not a concern| |

# Presence in seedling soybean

|Common|Widespread|
|---|---|
|Region of concern (particular species composition varies)|Southeast and Midsouth|
| |North America East of Rocky Mtns.|

# Table 1.

|Pest|White Grubs|Wireworms|
|---|---|---|
|Three-cornered Alfalfa Hopper| | |
# Journal of Integrated Pest Management, 2018, Vol. 9, No. 1

Depending on species, wireworms live 2–6 yr in the soil. Adults of beetle populations in relation to soybean planting and development, and alternative transmission routes of BPMV (Bradshaw et al. 2008, Hill and Whitham 2014), eclose in the fall, but generally do not emerge from the ground until spring, when they lay eggs in soil, generally near grasses (Wintersteen 1994, Pedigo and Rice 2009, Hodgson et al. 2012c).

Wireworms damage germinating soybean seeds, small roots, and shoot tissue before it emerges from the soil (Wintersteen 1994, Hodgson et al. 2012c). Risk of attack is increased by early planting, conversion of fields from grassland, and sustained cool soil temperatures in the spring that delay germination and plant growth (Wintersteen 1994, Hodgson et al. 2012c). Various management tactics can reduce populations of wireworms and their risk of economic injury to soybean (Wintersteen 1994, Hodgson et al. 2012c). Fallowing fields and achieving good weed control during fallow will limit food sources for these pests. Shallow tillage in the spring can kill wireworms near the soil surface. Increased seeding rates can be used to compensate for anticipated plant attrition due to wireworms. Soil insecticides or insecticide seed treatments are warranted in fields where sampling reveals large infestations, in fields with a history of significant damage, or where soybean follows conversion from long-term grassland.

Wireworms are usually problematic in situations with risk factors described earlier. They were listed as a significant pest of soybeans in the Mid-South region but not in other soybean production regions, based on surveys in 2009 and 2014 (Steffey 2015). According to survey results from 2013, 2% of soybean farmers from 14 states actively managed for wireworms, and 0.8% considered them as the most important pest (Hurley and Mitchell 2016).

Threecornered alfalfa hopper is an example of a pest regarded as economically significant within some regions, but for which lost productivity and control may be limited only to individual states within the regions. It has been regarded as an economically significant pest in the Mid-South and Atlantic production regions. Indeed, three-cornered alfalfa hopper has diminished soybean production by roughly 25% because of yield loss and control costs in some years in several Mid-South states. However, inconsistency among state management guides for three-cornered alfalfa hopper suggests that its pest status varies among Mid-South and Atlantic states, and recent studies indicate that pest status of threecornered alfalfa hopper may have declined in early-soybean production systems in those regions.

# Summary and Conclusions

Nine insect pests of early-season soybean that are targeted for control by insecticidal seed treatments in the United States were considered in this review: bean leaf beetle, grape colaspis, leafhoppers, seedcorn maggot, soybean aphid, threecornered alfalfa hopper, white grubs, and wireworms (Table 1). Review of the nine species (complexes) characterized various factors involved in their pest status in early-season soybean and identified management options applicable to each pest (complex). The pest status of seedcorn maggot, white grubs, and wireworms is limited to a relatively small proportion of soybean fields with readily defined factors regarding the risk of early-season damage from each of these pests. Subsequently, ≤1% of soybean growers manages specifically for each of these three pests. Risk of economic damage from seedcorn maggot is uncommon and linked to green manuring and delayed seedling growth due to wet, cool soil. Similarly, risk from white grubs and wireworms is associated with soybean that is planted on land coming out of pasture, grassland, and similar situations. The higher risk situations identified for these three pests seem to present clear examples that can justify preventative measures if soybean is planted or consideration of planting a less vulnerable crop.

For the remaining six species (complexes), the extent and intensity of their pest pressure vary among and sometimes within soybean production regions, and some of the factors responsible for the variation are unknown. Bean leaf beetle was regarded as a significant economic pest by research and extension entomologists in all four major soybean-producing areas. However, despite the extensiveness of its perceived pest status, there is a lack of actual data that specify the frequency and proportion of soybean fields with significant economic infestation early in the season from bean leaf beetle. Moreover, risk of yield loss associated with BPMV is generally greater than that associated with bean leaf beetle per se, but quantification and management of BPMV risk are complicated by yearly variation in bean leaf beetle abundance and infectivity, timing.
# Journal of Integrated Pest Management, 2018, Vol. 9, No. 1

management contributes substantially to an areawide suppression of soybean aphid. Research is needed to address those questions. This article reviewed the pest status and management of nine insect species complexes that are early-season pests of soybean and currently targeted for management with insecticidal seed treatments. Given the large number of large number of insect herbivores that feed on soybean, the dynamic nature of the soybean agroecosystem, and the extent of world trade (Kogan and Turnipseed 1987, et al. 2011), additional early-season pests of soybean will likely arise in the future in the United States, either as emerging pests or as newly introduced pests. Reviews of factors involved in their pest status and management, as well as updated information on the current nine pests, may prove useful in providing a broader perspective on insect pest management in soybean.

# Acknowledgments

Eric Beckendorf and Lauren Hesler graciously reviewed drafts of this paper. Production of this paper was funded by USDA-ARS Project 5447-21220-005-00D. USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.

# References cited

Ajayi-Oyetunde, O. O., B. W. Diers, D. Lagos-Kutz, C. B. Hill, G. L. Hartman, U. Reuter-Carlson, and C. A. Bradley. 2016. Differential reactions of soybean isolines with combinations of aphid resistance genes Rag1, Rag2, and Rag3 to four soybean aphid biotypes. J. Econ. Entomol. 109: 1431–1437.

Alleman, R. J., C. R. Grau, and D. B. Hogg. 2002. Soybean aphid host range and virus transmission efficiency. In Proceedings: Wisconsin Fertilizer Agline Pest Management Conference. University of Wisconsin, Madison. https://soilsextension.triforce.cals.wisc.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/68/2016/07/Alleman-Conf-2002.pdf

Bahlai, C. A., S. Sikkema, R. H. Hallett, J. Newman, and A. W. Schaafsma. 2010. Modeling distribution and abundance of soybean aphid in soybean fields using measurements from the surrounding landscape. Environ. Entomol. 39: 50–56.

Bahlai, C. A., W. Vander Werf, M. E. O’Neal M, L. Hemerik, and D. A. Landis. 2015. Shifts in dynamic regime of an invasive lady beetle are linked to the invasion and insecticidal management of its prey. Ecol. Appl. 25: 1807–1818.

Bailey, J. C., L. B. Davis, and M. L. Laster. 1970. Stem girdling by the threecornered alfalfa hopper and height of soybean plants. J. Econ. Entomol. 63: 647–648.

Baur, M. E., D. J. Boethel, M. L. Boyd, G. R. Bowers, M. O. Way, L. G. Heatherly, J. Rabb, and L. Ashlock. 2000. Arthropod populations in early soybean production systems in the Mid-South. Environ. Entomol. 29: 312–328.

Beckendorf, E. A., M. A. Catangui, and W. E. Riedell. 2008. Soybean aphid feeding injury and soybean yield, yield components, and seed composition. Agron. J. 100: 237–246.

Beyer, A. H. 1922. The bean leaf-hopper and hopperburn, with methods of control. Florida Agr. Exp. Sta. Bull. 164: 61–88.

Beyer, B. A., S. Rajagopalbabu, P. M. Roberts, and M. R. Abney. 2017. Biology and management of the threecornered alfalfa hopper (Hemiptera: Membracidae) in alfalfa, soybean, and peanut. J. Integr. Pest. Manag. 8: 10.

Bigger, J. H. 1928. Hibernation studies of Colaspis brunnea (Fab.). J. Econ. Entomol. 21: 268–273.

Blickenstaff, C. C. and J. L. Huggans. 1962. Soybean insects and related arthropods in Missouri. Mo. Agr. Expt. Sta. Res. Bul. 803: 51 p.

Bloomingdale, C., M. D. Irizarry, R. L. Groves, D. S. Mueller, and D. L. Smith. 2017. Seasonal population dynamics of thrips (Thysanoptera) in Wisconsin and Iowa soybean fields. J. Econ. Entomol. 110: 133–141.

Boethel, D. J. 1999. Assessment of soybean germplasm for multiple insect resistance, pp. 101–129. In S. L. Clement and S. S. Quisenberry (eds.), Global plant and genetic resources for insect-resistant crops. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.

Douglas, M. R. and J. F. Tooker. 2015. Large-scale deployment of seed treatments has driven rapid increase in use of neonicotinoid insecticides and preemptive pest management in US field crops. Environ. Sci. Technol. 49: 5088–5097.
# Journal of Integrated Pest Management, 2018, Vol. 9, No. 1

Douglas, M. R., J. R. Rohr, and J. F. Tooker. 2015. Neonicotinoid insecticide travels through a soil food chain, disrupting biological control of non-target pests and decreasing soybean yield. J. Appl. Ecol. 52: 250–260.

Drees, B. M. and M. E. Rice. 1990. Population dynamics and seasonal occurrence of soybean insect pests in southeastern Texas. Southwest. Entomol. 15: 49–56.

Eaton, A. T. 1978. Studies on distribution patterns, ovipositional preference, and egg and larval survival of Colaspis brunnea (Fab.) in North Carolina Coastal Plain soybean fields. Ph.D dissertation, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC.

ERS (USDA, Economic Research Service). 2017. Background. Soybean and oil crops. https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/crops/soybeans-oil-crops/background. Accessed 28 June 2017.

Flint, W. P. 1941. Found-an insect enemy of soybeans. Soybean Dig. 1: 4.

Fox, T. B., D. A. Landis, F. F. Cardoso, and C. D. Difonzo. 2005. Impact of predation on establishment of the soybean aphid, Aphis glycines in soybean, Glycine max. BioControl. 50: 545–563.

Funderburk, J. E., L. P. Pedigo, E. C. Berry. 1983. Seedcorn maggot (Diptera: Anthomyiidae) emergence in conventional and reduced-tillage soybean systems in Iowa. J. Econ. Entomol. 76: 131–134.

Giesler, L. J., S. A. Ghabrial, T. E. Hunt, and J. H. Hill. 2002. Bean pod mottle virus: a threat to U.S. soybean production. Plant Dis. 86: 1280–1289.

Gergerich, R. C., L. L. Domier. 2015. Bean pod mottle virus, pp. 117–119. In G. L. Hartman, J. C. Rupe, E. J. Sikora, L. L. Domier, J. A. Davis, and K. L. Steffey (eds.), Compendium of soybean diseases and pests, 5th ed., APS Press, St. Paul, MN.

Greene, J. K., and J. A. Davis. 2015. Stink bugs, pp. 146–149. In G. L. Hartman, J. C. Rupe, E. J. Sikora, L. L. Domier, J. A. Davis, and K. L. Steffey (eds.), Compendium of soybean diseases and pests, 5th ed., APS Press, St. Paul, MN.

Hammond, R. B. 1995. Timing of plowing and planting: effects on seedcorn maggot populations in soybean. Crop Prot. 14: 471–477.

Hammond, R. B. 1997. Long-term conservation tillage studies: impact of no-till on seedcorn maggot (Diptera: Anthomyiidae). Crop Prot. 16: 221–225.

Hammond, R. B. and R. L. Cooper. 1993. Interaction of planting times following the incorporation of a living, green cover crop and control measures on seedcorn maggot populations in soybean. Crop Prot. 12: 539–543.

Helm, C. G., M. Kogan, and B. G. Hill. 1980. Sampling leafhoppers in soybean, pp. 260–282. In M. Kogan and D. C. Herzog (eds.), Sampling methods in soybean entomology. Springer, New York.

Hesler, L. S. 2014. Inventory and assessment of foliar natural enemies of the soybean aphid (Hemiptera: Aphididae) in South Dakota. Environ. Entomol. 43: 577–588.

Hesler, L. S., M. V. Chiozza, M. E. O’Neal, G. C. MacIntosh, K. J. Tilmon, D. L. Chandrasena, N. A. Tinsley, S. R. Cianzio, A. C. Costamagna, E. M. Cullen, et al. 2013. Performance and prospects of Rag genes for management of soybean aphid. Entomol. Exp. Appl. 147: 201–216.

Hicks, P. M., P. L. Mitchell, E. P. Dunigan, L. D. Newsom, and P. K. Bollich. 1984. Effect of threecornered alfalfa hopper (Homoptera: Membracidae) feeding on translocation and nitrogen fixation in soybeans. J. Econ. Entomol. 77: 1275–1277.

Higley, L. G. and D. J. Boethel (eds.). 1994. Handbook of soybean insect pests. Entomological Society of America, Lanham, MD.

Higley, L. G. and R. B. Hammond. 1994. Seedcorn maggot, pp. 77–79. In L. G. Higley and D. J. Boethel (eds.). Handbook of soybean insect pests. Entomological Society of America, Lanham, MD.

Hill, C. B., A. Chirumamilla, and G. L. Hartman. 2012. Resistance and virulence in the soybean-Aphis glycines interaction. Euphytica. 186: 635–646.

Hill, J. H. and S. A. Whitham. 2014. Control of virus diseases in soybeans. Adv. Virus Res. 90: 355–390.

Hodgson, E. W., M. Kemis, and B. Geisinger. 2012a. Assessment of Iowa soybean growers for insect pest management practices. J. Ext. 50: RIB6.

Hodgson, E. W., B. P. McCornack, K. Tilmon, and J. J. Knodel. 2012b. Management recommendations for soybean aphid (Hemiptera: Aphididae) in the United States. J. Integr. Pest Manag. 3: E1–E10.

Hodgson, E., A. Sisson, D. Mueller, L. Jesse, E. Saalau-Rojas, and A. Duster. 2012c. Field Crop Insects. Publication no. CS10014. Iowa State University and Iowa Soybean Association, Ames, IA.

Hodgson, E. W., B. P. McCornack, K. Tilmon, and J. J. Knodel. 2012b. Management recommendations for soybean aphid (Hemiptera: Aphididae) in the United States. J. Integr. Pest Manag. 3: E1–E10.

Labrie, G., B. Estevez, and E. Lucas. 2016. Impact of large strip cropping system (24 and 48 rows) on soybean aphid during four years in organic soybean. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 222: 249–257.

Lambert, L. 1994. Grape colaspis, pp. 56–57. In L. G. Higley and D. J. Boethel (eds.), Handbook of soybean insect pests. Entomological Society of America, Lanham, MD.
# Journal of Integrated Pest Management, 2018, Vol. 9, No. 1

Lambert, L., and J. Tyler. 1999. Appraisal of insect-resistant soybean, pp. 131–148. In B. R. Wiseman and J. A. Webster (eds.), Economic, environmental, and social benefits of resistance in field crops. Proceedings of the Thomas Say Publications in Entomology, Entomological Society of America, Lanham, MD.

Lentz, G. 1985. Occurrence of Phyllophaga congrua (LeConte) and P. implicita (Horn) (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae) on soybeans. J. Kans. Entomol. Soc. 58: 202–206.

Lindsay, D. R. 1943. The biology and morphology of Colaspis flavida (Say). Ph.D dissertation. Department of Zoology and Entomology. Iowa State College, Ames, IA.

Lundgren, J. G. and W. E. Riedell. 2008. Soybean nitrogen relations and root characteristics after Cerotoma trifurcata (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) larval feeding injury. J. Entomol. Sci. 43: 107–116.

Lundgren, J. G., and F. R. Musser. 2015. Bean leaf beetle, pp. 137–139. In G. L. Hartman, J. C. Rupe, E. J., Sikora, L. L. Domier, J. A. Davis, and K. L. Steffey (eds.), Compendium of soybean diseases and pests, 5th ed., APS Press, St. Paul, MN.

Macedo, T. B., C. S. Bastos, L. G. Higley, K. R. Ostlie, and S. Madhavan. 2003. Photosynthetic responses of soybean to soybean aphid (Homoptera: Aphididae) injury. J. Econ. Entomol. 96: 188–193.

Mayse, M. A. and N. P. Tugwell. 1980. Sampling methods for grape colaspis larvae in Arkansas soybean/rice fields. Arkansas Farm. Res. 29: 3.

McCarville, M. T., M. E. O’Neal, B. D. Potter, K. J. Tilmon, E. M. Cullen, B. P. McCornack, J. F. Tooker, and D. A. Prischmann-Voldseth. 2014. One gene versus two: a regional study on the efficacy of single gene versus pyramided resistance for soybean aphid management. J. Econ. Entomol. 107: 1680–1687.

McCornack, B. P. and D. W. Ragsdale. 2006. Efficacy of thiamethoxam to suppress soybean aphid populations in Minnesota soybean. Online. Crop Manage. doi:10.1094/CM-2006-0915-01-RS.

McCornack, B. P., D. W. Ragsdale, and R. C. Venette. 2004. Demography of soybean aphid (Homoptera: Aphididae) at summer temperatures. J. Econ. Entomol. 97:854–861.

McCornack, B. P., A. C. Costamagna, and D. W. Ragsdale. 2008. Within-plant distribution of soybean aphid (Hemiptera: Aphididae) and development of node-based sample units for estimating whole-plant densities in soybean. J. Econ. Entomol. 101: 1488–1500.

McPherson, R. M., M. L. Wells, and C. S. Bundy. 2001. Impact of early soybean production system on arthropod pest populations in Georgia. Environ. Entomol. 30: 76–81.

Medler, J. T. 1957. Migration of the potato leafhopper-a report on a cooperative study. J. Econ. Entomol. 50: 493–497.

Meihls, L. N., T. L. Clark, W. C. Bailey, and M. R. Ellersieck. 2010. Population growth of soybean aphid, Aphis glycines, under varying levels of predator exclusion. J. Insect Sci. 10: 144.

Metcalf, C. L., W. P. Flint, and R. L. Metcalf. 1962. Destructive and useful insects: their habits and control, 4th ed. McGraw-Hill, New York.

Meisch, M. V. and N. M. Randolph. 1965. Life-history studies and rearing techniques for the three-cornered alfalfa hopper. J. Econ. Entomol. 58: 1057–1059.

Mitchell, P. L. and L. D. Newsom. 1984. Seasonal history of the threecornered alfalfa hopper (Homoptera: Membracidae) in Louisiana. J. Econ. Entomol. 77: 906–914.

Mueller, A. J. 1980. Sampling three cornered alfalfa hopper on soybean, pp. 382–393. In M. Kogan and D. C. Herzog (eds.), Sampling methods in soybean entomology. Springer, New York.

Mueller, A. 1994. Soybean thrips, pp. 82–83. In L. G. Higley and D. J. Boethel (eds.), Handbook of soybean insect pests. Entomological Society of America, Annapolis, MD.

Mueller, A. J. and B. A. Dumas. 1975. Effects of stem girdling by the threecornered alfalfa hopper on soybean yields. J. Econ. Entomol. 68: 1731–1733.

Mueller, A. J. and J. W. Jones. 1983. Effects of main-stem girdling of early vegetative stages of soybean plants by threecornered alfalfa hoppers (Homoptera: Membracidae). J. Econ. Entomol. 76: 920–922.

Mueller, A. J. and R. G. Luttrell. 1977. Thrips on soybean. Arkansas Farm Research, p. 7. Agricultural Experiment Station, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR.

NASS (USDA, National Agricultural Statistics Service). 2015 Summary, Washington, DC. https://www.usda.gov/nass/PUBS/TODAYRPT/cropan16.pdf. Accessed 28 June 2017.

Newsom, L. D., P. L. Mitchell, and N. N. Troxclair, Jr. 1983. Overwintering of the threecornered alfalfa hopper in Louisiana. J. Econ. Entomol. 76: 1298–1302.

Noma, T., C. Gratton, M. Colunga-Garcia, M. J. Brewer, E. E. Mueller, K. A. G. Wyckhuys, G. E. Heimpel, and M. E. O’Neal. 2010. Relationship of soybean aphid (Hemiptera: Aphididae) to soybean plant nutrients, landscape structure, and natural enemies. Environ. Entomol. 39: 31–41.

North, J. H., J. Gore, A. L. Catchot, S. D. Stewart, G. M. Lorenz, F. R. Musser, D. R. Cook, D. L. Kern, and D. M. Dodds. 2016. Value of neonicotinoid insecticide seed treatments in mid-south soybean (Glycine max) production systems. J. Econ. Entomol. 109: 1156–1160.

Ogunlana, M. O. and L. P. Pedigo. 1974a. Economic injury levels of the potato leafhopper on soybeans in Iowa. J. Econ. Entomol. 67: 201–202.

Ogunlana, M. O. and L. P. Pedigo. 1974b. Pest status of the potato leafhopper on soybeans in central Iowa. J. Econ. Entomol. 67: 201–202.

Osborn, H. 1911. Economic importance of Stictocephala. J. Econ. Entomol. 4: 137–140.

Papiernik, S. K., T. W. Sappington, R. G. Luttrell, L. S. Hesler, and K. C. Allen. 2017. Overview: risk factors and historic levels of pressure from sporadic insect pests of seedling corn, cotton, soybean, and wheat in the US. J. Integr. Pest Manage. (In press).

Pedersen, P., C. Grau, E. Cullen, N. Koval, and J. H. Hill. 2007. Potential for integrated management of soybean virus disease. Plant Dis. 91: 1255–1259.

Pedigo, L. P. 1994. Bean leaf beetle, pp. 42–44. In L. G. Higley and D. J. Boethel (eds.), Handbook of soybean insect pests. Entomological Society of America, Lanham, MD.

Pedigo, L. P. and M. E. Rice. 2009. Entomology and pest management, 6th ed. Waveland Press, Inc., Long Grove, IL, 784 pp.

Pienkowski, R. L. and J. T. Medler. 1964. Synoptic weather conditions associated with long-ranged movement of the potato leafhopper, Empoasca fabae, into Wisconsin. Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 57: 588–591.

Poos, F. W. 1932. Biology of the potato leafhopper, Empoasca fabae (Harris), and some closely related species of Empoasca. J. Econ. Entomol. 25: 639–646.

Ragsdale, D. W., D. J. Voegtlin, and R. J. O’Neil. 2004. Soybean aphid biology in North America. Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 97: 204–208.

Ragsdale, D. W., B. P. McCornack, R. C. Venette, B. D. Potter, I. V. MacRae, E. W. Hodgson, M. E. O’Neal, K. D. Johnson, R. J. O’Neil, T. E. Hunt, et al. 2007. Economic threshold for soybean aphid (Hemiptera: Aphididae). J. Econ. Entomol. 100: 1258–1267.
# Journal of Integrated Pest Management, 2018, Vol. 9, No. 1

Ragsdale, D. W., D. A. Landis, J. Brodeur, G. E. Heimpel, and N. Desneux. 2011. Ecology and management of the soybean aphid in North America. Annu. Rev. Entomol. 56: 375–399.

Ratcliffe, R. H., T. L. Bissell, and W. E. Bissell. 1960. Observations on soybean insects in Maryland. J. Econ. Entomol. 53: 131–133.

Reisig, D. D., D. A. Herbert, and S. Malone. 2012. Impact of seed treatments on thrips (Thysanoptera: Thripidae) and yield in Virginia and North Carolina. J. Econ. Entomol. 105: 884–889.

Rhainds, M., H. J. Yoo, P. Kindlmann, D. Voegtlin, D. Castillo, C. Rutledge, C. Sadof, S. Yaninek, and R. J. O’Neil. 2010. Two-year oscillation cycle in abundance of soybean aphid in Indiana. Agric. For. Entomol. 12: 251–257.

Rice, M. E. and B. M. Drees. 1985. Oviposition and girdling habits of the threecornered alfalfa hopper (Homoptera: Membracidae) on preblooming soybeans. J. Econ. Entomol. 78: 829–834.

Rice, M. E. and E. G. Riley. 1994. White grubs, pp. 99–100. In L. G. Higley and D. J. Boethel (eds.). Handbook of soybean insect pests. Entomological Society of America, Lanham, MD.

Rolston, L. H. and P. Rouse. 1965. The biology and ecology of the grape colaspis, Colaspis flavida Say, in relation to rice production in Arkansas Grand Prairie. Bulletin No. 694. University of Arkansas, Division of Agricultural Cooperative Extension Service, Fayetteville, AR.

Rutledge, C. E. and R. J. O’Neil. 2006. Soybean plant stage and population growth of soybean aphid. J. Econ. Entomol. 99: 60–66.

Rutledge, C. E., R. J. O’Neil, T. B. Fox, and D. A. Landis. 2004. Soybean aphid predators and their use in integrated pest management. Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 97: 240–248.

Simmons, A. M., L. D. Godfrey, and K. V. Yeargan. 1985. Ovipositional sites of the potato leafhopper (Homoptera: Cicadellidae) on vegetative stage soybean plants. Environ. Entomol. 14: 165–169.

Simmons, A. M., B. C. Pass, and K. V. Yeargan. 1984. Influence of selected legumes on egg production, adult survival, and ovipositional preference of the potato leafhopper. J. Agric. Entomol. 1: 311–317.

Smelser, R. B. and L. P. Pedigo. 1991. Phenology of Cerotoma trifurcata on soybean and alfalfa in central Iowa. Environ. Entomol. 20: 514–519.

Smelser, R. B. and L. P. Pedigo. 1992. Bean leaf beetle (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) herbivory on leaf, stem and pod components of soybean. J. Econ. Entomol. 85: 2408–2412.

Sparks, A. N. and D. J. Boethel. 1987. Late-season damage to soybeans by threecornered alfalfa hopper (Homoptera: Membracidae) adults and nymphs. J. Econ. Entomol. 80: 471–477.

Sparks, A. N. and L. D. Newsom. 1984. Evaluation of the pest status of the threecornered alfalfa hopper (Homoptera: Membracidae) on soybean in Louisiana. J. Econ. Entomol. 77: 1553–1558.

Specker, D. R., E. J. Shields, D. M. Ubach, and S. A. Allan. 1990. Mortality response of potato leafhopper (Homoptera: Cicadellidae) to low temperatures: Implications for predicting overwintering mortality. J. Econ. Entomol. 83: 1541–1548.

Steffey, K. L., M. E. Gray, and L. G. Higley. 1994. Introduction to identification and diagnosis of injury, pp. 17–34. In L. G. Higley and D. J. Boethel (eds.), Handbook of soybean insect pests. Entomological Society of America, Lanham, MD.

Tonhasca, Jr., A. 1994. Response of soybean herbivores to two agronomic practices increasing agroecosystem diversity. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 48: 57–65.

Tugwell, P., F. D. Miner, and D. E. Davis. 1972. Threecornered alfalfa hopper infestations and soybean yield. J. Econ. Entomol. 65: 1731–1733.

Tugwell, P., E. P. Rouse, and R. G. Thompson. 1973. Insects in soybean and a weed host (Desmodium sp.). Arkansas Agricultural Experiment Station, Reporting Series 214: 18 p.

USGS (U. S. Geological Survey). 2014. National Water-quality Assessment (NAWQA) Program Annual Pesticide Use Maps. https://water.usgs.gov/nawqa/pnsp/usage/maps.

Vance, T. C. 1974. Larvae of the Sericothripini (Thysanoptera: Thripidae), with reference to other larvae of the Terebrantia, of Illinois. Illinois Natural History Survey Bulletin. 31: 145–208.

Venette, R. C. and D. W. Ragsdale. 2004. Assessing the invasion by soybean aphid (Homoptera: Aphididae): where will it end? Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 97: 219–226.

Walter, A. J., and C. D. DiFonzo. 2007. Soil potassium deficiency affects soybean phloem nitrogen and soybean aphid populations. Environ. Entomol. 36: 26–33.

Way, M. O. 1994. Status of soybean insect pests in the United States, pp. 15–16. In L. G. Higley and D. J. Boethel (eds.), Handbook of soybean insect pests. Entomological Society of America, Annapolis, MD.

Wildermuth, V. L. 1915. Three-cornered alfalfa hopper. J. Agric. Res. 3: 343–364.

Wintersteen, W. K. 1994. Wireworms, p. 101. In L. G. Higley and D. J. Boethel (eds.). Handbook of soybean insect pests. Entomological Society of America, Lanham, MD.

Yeargan, K. V. 1994. Potato leafhopper, pp. 75–77. In L. G. Higley and D. J. Boethel (eds.), Handbook of soybean insect pests. Entomological Society of America Annapolis, MD.

Zeiss, M. R. and L. P. Pedigo. 1996. Timing of food plant availability: Effect on survival and oviposition of the bean leaf beetle (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae). Environ. Entomol. 25: 295–302.

Zhou, J. and I. E. Tzanetakis. 2013. Epidemiology of soybean vein necrosis-associated virus. Phytopathology. 103: 966–971.